Docs: Import Prisma Schema (#317)
amplication/docs: docs/getting-started/how-prisma-schemas-are-converted-into-entities.md

model Product {
  id          String   @id @default(cuid())
  createdAt   DateTime @default(now())
  updatedAt   DateTime @updatedAt
  name        String?
-item_price  Float?
+itemPrice   Float?    @map("item_price")
  description String?
  orders      Order[]
}
```

#### Field Types

Now that Amplication has updated both the model names and field names, it has to update the types of the fields.

For example, here's how two models could see transformations:

```diff name="schema.prisma"  
-model products
+model Product {
  id          String   @id @default(cuid())
  createdAt   DateTime @default(now())
  updatedAt   DateTime @updatedAt
  name        String?
  itemPrice   Float?
  description String? 
- orders      orders[]
+ orders      Order[]
}

-model orders
+model Order {
  id         String    @id @default(cuid())
  createdAt  DateTime  @default(now())
  updatedAt  DateTime  @updatedAt
  totalPrice Int?
- product    products?  @relation(fields: [productId], references: [id])  
+ product    Product?  @relation(fields: [productId], references: [id])
  productId  String?
}
```

#### Model IDs

This phase converts `@@id` attributes in your models to `@@unique` attributes.

> It also introduces an `id` field of type `String` to every model that uses a composite ID.

Author: @abrl91 Also here.

Reviewer: @dericksozo what about this?

# How Prisma Schema Is Converted Into Amplication Entities

After you [import your prisma schema](/how-to/import-prisma-schema), it'll go through a series of conversions so that it matches Amplication's internal structure.

These conversions are what you see in the log while your `schema.prisma` file is processing.

![Import Prisma Schema Upload Log](./assets/import-prisma-schema-log.png)

:::note
See the [Log Warnings](#log-warnings) section on possible warnings you might encounter while your `schema.prisma` is processing.
:::

Amplication will process your schema by running it through 3 different phases:

1. Validate
2. Prepare
3. Convert

In this article, you'll learn more about those 3 conversion steps that your schema goes through so that it matches Amplication's internal structure.

### Step 1: Validate   

The first validation step is performed immediately after you upload your `schema.prisma` file.

The purpose of this step is to validate the structure and syntax of the `schema.prisma` file.
This validation process is grounded in the [Prisma conventions](https://www.prisma.io/docs/reference/api-reference/prisma-schema-reference#naming-conventions) and other restrictions.

> Besides checking structure and syntax, the validate step also checks if the schema contains any models to process. If no models are present, you see will an error, and the conversion process will stop.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Besides checking structure and syntax, the validate step also checks if the schema contains any models to process. If no models are present, you will see an error, and the conversion process will stop.
```

### Step 2: Prepare   

During the prepare phase, Amplication runs the schema through 5 different operations:

1. prepareModelNames
2. prepareFieldNames  
3. prepareFieldTypes
4. prepareModelIdAttribute

> 5. prepareIdField

Reviewer 2: should we use real language like 'Model Names" instead of "prepareModelNames"?

Each operation represents a transformation to be made on the schema, and their collective execution ensures the schema is in the correct format before being used for Amplication’s entities and fields creation.

#### Model Names

> This part renames models in the Prisma schema to follow Amplication's specific format.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This part renames models in the Prisma schema to follow Amplication's best practices and conventions.
```

Amplication's format is model names in **PascalCase**, **no underscores**, and **singular**.

All original model names are preserved in the database with the `@@map` custom attribute where necessary.

:::note
If the model already has the **`@@map`** attribute, it won’t be added, even if the model name was formatted. 
:::

Here's an example of a transformation that would happen on one model:

```diff title="schema.prisma"
-model course_rating  
+model CourseRating {
  id        String    @id @default(cuid())
	createdAt DateTime  @default(now())
  updatedAt DateTime  @updatedAt
	rating    Int      

+@@map("course_rating") 

> }

Reviewer 2: format correctly

If the field already has the **`@map`** attribute, it won’t be added, even if the field name was formatted.
:::

Here's a quick example of a simple field name transformation:

```diff title="schema.prisma"
model Product {
  id          String   @id @default(cuid())
  createdAt   DateTime @default(now())
  updatedAt   DateTime @updatedAt
  name        String?
-item_price  Float?
+itemPrice  Float?    @map("item_price")
  description String?
  orders      Order[]
}
```

#### Field Types

Now that Amplication has updated both the model names and field names, it has to update the types of the fields.

For example, here's how two models could see transformations:

```diff name="schema.prisma"  
-model products
+model Product {
  id          String   @id @default(cuid())
  createdAt   DateTime @default(now())
  updatedAt   DateTime @updatedAt
  name        String?
  itemPrice   Float?
  description String? 
-orders      orders[]
+orders      Order[]
}

-model orders
+model Order {
  id         String    @id @default(cuid())
  createdAt  DateTime  @default(now())
  updatedAt  DateTime  @updatedAt
  totalPrice Int?
-product    products?  @relation(fields: [productId], references: [id])  

> +product    Product?  @relation(fields: [productId], references: [id])

Reviewer 2: I think this entire section is not needed since it is not providing any value to the reader. Obviously when changing the name of the model we also need to change the reference to it - but as for the reader this is obvious and we don't need to mention that

Following the preparation phase, we leverage the updated Prisma schema to generate Amplication's entity and field objects derived directly from this prepared schema.

The first thing that happens is that the Prisma Models get converted into Amplication entities.
This is based on the following information:

- Name
- Display Name
- Plural Display Name
- Description
- Custom Attribute
- Fields

The next thing that happens is that the Prisma data types get converted into Amplication data types.

Here is a re-written table summarizing the Prisma to Amplication data type conversions:

| Prisma | Amplication | Description |
|-|-|-|  
| String (ID) | Id | Converts ID field with String type to Amplication Id type, defaults to cuid |
| Int (ID) | Id (autoincrement) | Converts ID field with Int type to autoincrement Amplication Id |   
| Boolean | Boolean | Same Boolean type |
| DateTime (@default(now())) | CreatedAt | DateTime with now() default converts to CreatedAt |
| DateTime (@updatedAt) | UpdatedAt | DateTime with updatedAt attribute converts to UpdatedAt |
| DateTime | DateTime | Plain DateTime remains DateTime |
| Float, Decimal | Decimal | Float and Decimal convert to Decimal |

> | Int, BigInt | WholeNumber | Int and BigInt convert to WholeNumber |

Reviewer: It seems like it is covered here @yuval-hazaz

| String | SingleLineText | String converts to SingleLineText |    
| Json | Json | Json types are equivalent |  
| Enum | OptionSet | Enum converts to OptionSet |
| Enum[] | MultiSelectOptionSet | Enum array converts to MultiSelectOptionSet |

> | Model relation | Lookup | Relation to another model becomes Lookup |

Reviewer 2: @abrl91 we need to update the list with the new types

Reviewer: https://github.com/amplication/docs/pull/317/files/9c503dae0ef7d23052733038a7b60b4842cb9f79#r1294641455

The final Prisma schema file will not contain these mapping attributes.  

If your app logic relies on `@map` and `@@map` custom attributes, you'll need to manually adjust the generated `schema.prisma` file or your app code to ensure everything works correctly.

Here's how that log might look:

```bash title="Amplication Upload Log" 
2023-07-06T09:47:39.410Z (Warning) The option 'PENDING' has been created in the enum 'OrderStatus', but its value has not been mapped
2023-07-06T09:47:39.410Z (Info) The option 'COMPLETED' has been created in the enum 'OrderStatus'
2023-07-06T09:47:39.410Z (Info) The option 'CANCELLED' has been created in the enum 'OrderStatus'
2023-07-06T09:47:39.411Z (Warning) The option 'INDIVIDUAL' has been created in the enum 'CustomerType', but its value has not been mapped  
2023-07-06T09:47:39.411Z (Warning) The option 'COMPANY' has been created in the enum 'CustomerType', but its value has not been mapped
```

### 2. Composite IDs on models   

A model in Prisma can use the `@@id` custom attribute and combine fields to create a unique identifier for each record.

> But, due to current limitations, Amplication requires that each model have a single, distinct `id` field.   

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
But, best on Amplication's best practices, it requires that each model have a single, distinct `id` field.   
```

> During schema processing. Amplication modifies IDs created with the `@@id` custom attribute to be `@@unique` custom attributes, which are supported.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
During schema processing. Amplication modifies IDs created with the `@@id` custom attribute to be `@@unique` custom attributes.
```

> It also introduces a new `id` field of type `String` to each model.   

Reviewer 2: @abrl91 is it string?

Author: @yuval-hazaz @abrl91 I was also referring to this line to confirm whether it is a `String` or `WholeNumber`?

For example, if your generated `schema.prisma` file looks like the following:

```tsx title="schema.prisma"
model Employee {
  firstName String
  lastName  String
  birthdate DateTime

  @@id([firstName, lastName, birthdate])
}
```

Amplication will transform it to look like the following:  

```diff title="schema.prisma"
model Employee {
+ id String @id @default(cuid())
  firstName String
  lastName  String
  birthdate DateTime

- @@id([firstName, lastName, birthdate])  
+ @@unique([firstName, lastName, birthdate])
}
```

As the schema is processed, we log warning entries if we encounter a model without an `id` field and an existing `@@id` attribute.

Here's an example of how that log might look:

```bash title="Amplication Upload Log"
2023-07-08T08:03:00.559Z (Warning) Attribute "id" was changed to "unique" on model "Employee"
2023-07-08T08:03:00.559Z (Warning) id field was added to model "Employee" 
```

> This approach this maintains uniqueness and integrity for each record in the database, but it may impact how relationships and queries are designed, given the shift from a composite id with `@@id` to a singular one.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This approach maintains uniqueness and integrity for each record in the database, but it may impact how relationships and queries are designed, given the shift from a composite id with `@@id` to a singular one.
```
